Help for Braille Star and Braillino

There are two navigation keys, one at the left end and one at the right end of
the braille line. Each has a top, middle, and bottom position. These six
positions are called: LT LM LB RT RM RB

LM        Go left one window.
RM        Go right one window.
LM RM     Go to the cursor.
LT        Move cursor up one line.
LB        Move cursor down one line.
RT        Go up one line.
RB        Go down one line.
RM LT     Go to the top-left corner.
RM LB     Go to the bottom-left corner.
LM RT     Go up to the top line.
LM RB     Go down to the bottom line.
LT RT     Go up to the nearest line with different content.
LT RB     Go down to the nearest line with different content.
LB RT     Go up to the nearest line with different highlighting.
LB RB     Go down to the nearest line with different highlighting.

These keys may also be used in conjunction with the routing keys as follows:

LT Rn     Start new cut buffer from character.
LM Rn     Enter function key.
LB Rn     Append to cut buffer from character.
RT Rn     Linear cut to character.
RM Rn     Switch to virtual terminal.
RB Rn     Rectangular cut to character.

In input mode, the ten front keys, from left to right, are:

    D7 D3 D2 D1 LS RS D4 D5 D6 D8

The Dn keys are the eight braille dots numbered according to their conventional
layout. Pressing any combination of them inputs the corresponding character.

The LS and RS keys are the left and right spacebars. Pressing just the left
spacebar inputs a space, and pressing just the right spacebar enters a return.  
When pressed together with any combination of the dot keys, the left spacebar
represents the control key, and the right spacebar represents the meta key.

In navigation mode (the default), the ten front keys, from left to right, are:

    B1 B2 B3 B4 UP DN B5 B6 B7 B8

Movement Commands:
UP        go left one window
DN        go right one window
B1        go to cursor
B1 UP     go to left end of line
B1 DN     go to right end of line
B2        go to top-left corner
B2 UP     go to top line
B2 DN     go to bottom line
B3        go to last motion
B3 UP     go left half window
B3 DN     go right half window
B6 UP     go left one character
B6 DN     go right one character
B4        go up one line
B5        go down one line
B4 b1     go up to last line of previous paragraph
B5 b1     go down to first line of next paragraph
B4 b2     go up to previous command prompt
B5 b2     go down to next command prompt
B4 b3     go up to previous line containing cut buffer
B5 b3     go down to next line containing cut buffer
B4 b6     go up to nearest line with different highlighting
B5 b6     go down to nearest line with different highlighting
B4 b7     go up several lines
B5 b7     go down several lines
B4 b8     go up to nearest line with different content
B5 b8     go down to nearest line with different content

Modes and Features:
b8        toggle help mode
B8 B1     toggle cursor tracking
B8 B2     toggle show cursor
B8 B3     toggle show attributes
B8 B6     toggle six-dot braille
B8 B7     toggle alert tunes
B7        toggle frozen screen
B7 B1     toggle preferences menu
B7 B2     load saved preferences
B7 B3     save preferences
B7 B6     toggle info mode
B6        toggle display attributes
B6 B1     toggle skip identical lines
B6 B2     toggle skip blank windows
B6 B3     toggle sliding window

Routing Key Commands:
Rn        bring cursor to character
B1 Rn     bring left end of window to column
B2 Rn     describe character
B3 Rn     append to cut buffer from character
B4 Rn     start new cut buffer from character
UP Rn     go up to line not indented more than column
DN Rn     go down to line not indented more than column
B5 Rn     rectangular cut to character
B6 Rn     linear cut to character
B7 Rn     set mark
B8 Rn     go to mark

Miscellaneous Commands:
UP DN     paste cut buffer at cursor position
B2 B3 UP  stop speaking
B2 B3 DN  say current line
B1 B8 UP  switch to navigation mode (the default)
B1 B8 DN  switch to input mode
